[Music]
you're walking down the beach toward the
water
but something feels different today the
water is bright green
and your nose gets filled with a
recognizable pungent stench of rotting
eggs
should you probably come closer to check
this unusual phenomenon
stop right now until it's too late what
you see is called a harmful
algal bloom also called algae bloom and
approaching it
is a very bad idea this bloom contains
algae that can produce dangerous toxic
gases
that's what makes previously popular
touristy places
deserted and outright treacherous you
can come to a sea or lake beach and spot
something that looks like blue green
foam floating on or just beneath the
surface of the water
or it may resemble streaks of bright
green paint
some blooms called red tides can color
the water brown or red
anyway once you notice something like
that try to stay away
keep and check that curiosity of yours
and don't go exploring
when algae decompose pockets of toxic
hydrogen sulfide gas are trapped under
the crust
if you unknowingly step on such a pocket
you'll set the gas free
and can accidentally inhale it it's
enough to say that this is likely to end
tragically on some beaches bulldozers
pile up the algae into dump trucks
and bring it to special centers there
workers dry the seaweed and get rid of
it
but sometimes these centers have to be
temporarily closed
algae mixed with sand and mud smells so
awful
that local people can't sleep at night
because of the stench
there are three types of dangerous algae
that can gather into harmful algal
blooms
cyanobacteria dinoflagellates and
diatoms
all of them are made up of minuscule
floating life forms that use sunlight to
create their own food
the blue-green algal blooms are caused
by cyanobacteria
they produce dangerous toxins that
destroy nerve tissue
it can get so bad that water treatment
plants might be unable to get rid of the
toxin
then local people are recommended not to
use tap water
dinoflagellates and one diatom species
are responsible for creating
red tides they occur mostly in ocean
bays
for a red algal bloom to form the water
has to be warm
salty and rich in nutrients such blooms
release a huge amount of different
toxins
in texas red tides used to happen once
in a decade
now they occur every three years in
florida
red algal blooms appear every year long
skinny diatoms can also produce
toxic substances harmful to people even
worse
if some shellfish like razor clams eat a
lot of this plankton
they become toxic too that's why cooking
them for dinner can lead to a disaster
it's one of the reasons why marine
waters are usually monitored
if toxin levels become too high beaches
get closed for shellfish harvesting
harmful algal blooms can last for
several days to a couple of months they
rid the water of oxygen
causing marine life to disappear but it
gets even worse
when microbes start to decompose the
algae at the end of the bloom
they consume even more oxygen in the
process and no fish can survive it
this creates huge areas of water almost
totally devoid of oxygen
and any kind of plant or animal life
harmful algal blooms appear in the
regions with too many nutrients in the
water
and the most common of these nutrients
comes from agriculture in other
industries
plus winter monsoons have become warmer
and now carry more moisture
this allows algae to gather in huge
blooms
some of them get so gigantic that the
thick green swirls
can be seen from space not all algal
blooms are harmful though
some of them just add a terrible taste
to the water change its color
or produce revolting smells
unfortunately
you won't be able to tell toxic algae
from totally harmless kinds
judging only by their appearance algae
aren't the only organisms that look
deceitfully harmless
here are other marine inhabitants you
should never ever touch
the urukenji jellyfish found in
australia
looks tiny and totally innocent but
appearances
are deceitful and this baby the size of
a human thumbnail
is actually lethal during stinger season
which lasts from november to may
tons of beaches get closed because of
these itsy bitsy creatures
what makes the jellyfish particularly
dangerous is their miniature size
you will simply fail to notice one while
swimming oops
the blue ringed octopus looks not just
harmless
it's breathtakingly beautiful but don't
let the looks fool you
you wouldn't want to disturb this
relatively small 8-inch long creature
it carries enough venom to bring down 26
adults within mere minutes
and once the animal feels threatened
well you can probably guess the outcome
at the same time when left alone the
octopus is
absolutely docile the infamous box
jellyfish
named for its cubic body shape lives in
the indian and pacific oceans
stay clear from a creature with a
squarish bell and long
dangling tentacles and even if you see
only a single tentacle
without the jellyfish attached to it
don't come close or touch it
the box jellyfish can grow up to 10 feet
and each of its tentacles has about 500
000 microscopic harpoons to inject venom
unlike other jellyfish box jellyfish are
hunters
they can latch onto you by wrapping
their slender tentacles around your limb
or body
with how dangerous their venom is it
won't be a pleasant experience
the crown of thorns starfish got its
name because of the venomous spines
covering its entire body
the second largest starfish in the world
it can grow up to 20 inches across
they feed on corals and they eat a lot
just one hungry starfish can finish off
more than 100 square feet of corals
within a year
the creatures also tend to have loads of
babies they produce more than 500
million eggs at a time
really an overachiever the fairly small
blue spotted ribbon tail ray
mostly lives in the tropical indian and
western pacific oceans
near coral reefs no more than 14 inches
across
the creature has a striking color
pattern it's yellow with electric blue
spots on its body
and several blue stripes on its tail but
however pretty this animal is keep in
mind that it's also dangerous
it can injure you with venomous tail
spines
you can come across lionfish in the
south pacific ocean and in the caribbean
sea
despite what most people think it's okay
to cook these fish
these creatures present real danger when
they are alive you can get accidentally
stung by their needle sharp fins that
contain venom
if you're an enthusiastic shell
collector you should know the cone snail
by sight
about four inches long the snail looks
cute and innocent
but this look is deceitful especially if
you're dealing with a tropical species
imagine finding a pretty shell and
picking it up
you aren't afraid your diving gloves
seem to offer perfect protection
but cone snails have tiny needle-like
protrusions they can deploy from their
mouths
and those are full of lethal neurotoxins
these harpoons can easily get through
your diving suits fabric
but the worst thing is that the venom
contains painkillers
you won't even know you've been stung
the flower urchin got to the guinness
book of records as the most dangerous
sea urchin on the planet
these creatures live in the indian and
western pacific oceans
and while a flower urchin may look like
something you'd love to see in your
aquarium
never ever touch it flower urchins have
enough venom to make your holiday
extremely unpleasant or short
the reef stone fish the world's most
venomous fish
knows how to camouflage oh goody
it can blend into the surroundings so
well you won't even notice it
even if you're paying attention this
makes it all too easy to step on the
fish
once the creature feels threatened like
when you're accidentally trying to crush
it
it extends the venomous spines growing
along its back
the more pressure the more venom the
fish produces
the creature remains dangerous even
taken out of the water
the indonesian needle fish isn't
venomous doesn't have sharp teeth
and will most likely stay as far away
from you as possible
the danger lies in the fish's body shape
after all it wasn't
called the needle for nothing needlefish
swim near the surface
in case of danger they launch themselves
out of the water
and their speed can reach 37 miles per
hour
their long sharp jaws turn the fish into
flying spears
the striped surgeon fish got its name
because of the spines growing near the
base of its tail
when the fish feels endangered it moves
the tail and reveals these
scalpel-shaped spines
if you don't hurry to move away you can
get several nasty cuts
keep in mind that some species are also
venomous
hey have a nice day at the beach y'all